initial release process (#4623)
input-output-hk/cardano-node: RELEASE.md

# Team

The release team is made up of the following:

> * Rotating release engineer from one of the development teams

Reviewer: One concern that has come up is a natural asymmetry inside the teams. In particular, the ledger team often makes changes that require integrating in ouroboros-network and node, and hence ledger might be in the best position to do the integration. We (ledger) do keep a changelog, but it is still probably easier for us. If we did use a different procedure, where the team who "caused" the work did the integration, then I would love it if we could also nominate folks on the other teams (for the same duration) for pairing up with the release engineer when they need help. If we name folks explicitly, it makes it easier to ask for help and it makes it easier to justify the time providing help.

* SRE team supporting deployment and CI/CD
* Test Engineers that focus on integration tests
* Performance Engineers running benchmarking tests

# Release Process

This is the release process for node releases

> 1. Release Squad Lead will work with rotating engineer and dev leads to determine where to cut the releases from ledger, network and node. These will be published via CHaP and will follow the defined process of the team for versioning, etc...

Reviewer 2: Who should be the `Release Squad Lead`?

Author: that would be me!

> 2. These will be integrated up the stack to the node to produce a release branch

Reviewer 2: Shouldn't this be done at `main` branch level? eg. update dependencies in discrete step, run integration tests, if it's green and we're happy make it a release branch (or tag)?

Reviewer 2: but we are going to integrate those changes through versions, right? eg. bump `ouroboros-consensus` package version to `1.2.3`?

3. Release Squad Lead will work with Test/Performance sub-teams to initiate a testing round. This may be a tagged release or may be tip of branch.

> 4. A release candidate will be deployed to preview/preprod by SRE

Reviewer 2: This probably implies the rc should be published somewhere too, for people to deploy and download it.

Author: that's all automated thankfully :)

> 5. Community will be notified of release candidate and given a few days to provide feedback

Reviewer 2: Could we make it regularly cadenced, so that people knows every X weeks there's a new preview/rc rolled out?

Author: that's difficult, because it requires the integration work to tag an rc. We can't say it will be tagged as an rc on day X because we don't know if the changes will be integrated by day X.

Reviewer 2: But you could reverse the problem, say that on day X there will be a rc and then let whatever is integrated at that date be deployed?

6. Release Squad Lead will draft Release notes
7. Head of Engineering will meet with release team and identify if release should be published as stable or beta (pre-release) in GitHub. stable releases can go all the way to mainnet, beta should only go to preprod and wait for that release to be relabeled as stable or a new stable release to be cut.

> 8. Release is published

Reviewer 2: What does this mean? Artifacts are published on docker/binaries registry?

# Rotating Release Engineer Role

> All sprints are aligned across the node and it's components. At the end of a sprint cycle the new rotationg release engineer is decided on by the leadership team.

Reviewer 3: Spelling error: "rotationg"

This person's primary duties are integration of new releases of dependencies up the stack to the node. They serve this role until the release is finalized
according to the above release process (ideally 1 sprint cycle).

# Sub-Teams

> ## SRE

Reviewer 3: Worth adding what the SRE acronym stands for

# Team

The release team is made up of the following:

* Rotating release engineer from one of the development teams
* SRE team supporting deployment and CI/CD
* Test Engineers that focus on integration tests
* Performance Engineers running benchmarking tests

# Release Process

This is the release process for node releases

1. Release Squad Lead will work with rotating engineer and dev leads to determine where to cut the releases from ledger, network and node. These will be published via CHaP and will follow the defined process of the team for versioning, etc...
2. These will be integrated up the stack to the node to produce a release branch
3. Release Squad Lead will work with Test/Performance sub-teams to initiate a testing round. This may be a tagged release, a commit based off of master, or a commit
based off of a previously released version as a hotfix
4. A release candidate will be deployed to preview/preprod by SRE
5. Community will be notified of release candidate and given a few days to provide feedback
6. Release Squad Lead will draft Release notes

> 7. Head of Engineering will meet with release team and identify if release should be published as stable or beta (pre-release) in GitHub. stable releases can go all the way to mainnet, beta should only go to preprod and wait for that release to be relabeled as stable or a new stable release to be cut.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
7. Head of Engineering will meet with release team and identify if release should be published as stable or beta (pre-release) in GitHub. Atable releases can go all the way to mainnet, beta should only go to preprod and wait for that release to be relabeled as stable or a new stable release to be cut.
```

and helper scripts associated in running the node for local development and remote deployment purposes.

### Test Engineers

The test engineers are responsible for writing and running integration tests from `cardano-node-tests` repository. They execute integration tests as well as
tests that measure node synchronization times between releases.

### Performance Engineers

Performance engineers run benchmarks of the node and report any improvements/regressions between node versions.

# Versioning

The node uses a "pseudo semantic versioning" that takes into account breaking change (e.g. new eras) in the versioning logic. This new versioning
standard within the node is supported as of `8.0.0` release. The first part of the version always references the max protocol version allowed
on a stable network with no additional experimental override flags. This first part will remain `8` referencing Babbage era until the next era (Conway)
is finalized. The second digit is a new release incremented counter. Every release based off the master trunk will increment this number by one. The final

> part should always be `0` *unless* an emergeency hard fork is necessary that cannot wait until the next major release. This should be a rare occurrence going

Reviewer 4: A controlled hard fork implies a protocol version and consequently the major version bump. So, shouldn't the last version be bumped only for fixes that do not introduce breaking changes?

I would phrase it something like:
```suggestion
part should always be `0` *unless* an emergency bug fix is necessary that cannot wait until the next major release. This should be a rare occurrence going
```

Regardless of the wording it needs a spellfix:
```suggestion
part should always be `0` *unless* an emergency hard fork is necessary that cannot wait until the next major release. This should be a rare occurrence going
```
